# ðŸ¥ž Multi file guide

Welcome to the multi file guide. This guide shows how to use `CompositeView` class API
to handle multiple Gerber files at once. `CompositeView` relies on `GerberFile`
instances to provide access to individual Gerber files, hence It might be useful if you
take a look onto [Single file guide](./01_single_file.md) before continuing with this
guide.

## Creating `CompositeView` instance

[`CompositeView`](../../reference/pygerber/gerber/api/__init__.md#pygerber.gerber.api.CompositeView)
class is a thin wrapper around multiple
[`GerberFile`](../../reference/pygerber/gerber/api/__init__.md#pygerber.gerber.api.GerberFile)
objects which can be imported from `pygerber.gerber.api` module. You may have noticed
that the name of the class is weirdly generic, instead of being something like Project
or alike. Well, it turns out that usually it does not make sense to operate on all files
from project at once, for example, rendering **top** layers on top of **bottom** ones
will produce hard to understand images. Therefore PyGerbers `CompositeView` class takes
an aproach of group files that should be rendered together instead of accumulating all
the files from the project. With that logic in mind, we would use one instance of
`CompositeView` to represent top layer of the design, with silkscreen, solder mask, top
copper etc. while parts of **bottom** of PCB are grouped in separate `CompositeView`
instance.

`CompositeView` constructor accepts multiple `GerberFile` objects as arguments. Order of
files affects order of rendering to shared image. First `GerberFile` is the bottom most,
usually copper layer, will be covered with all other layers, and last `GerberFile` is
top most, usually silk screen, will not be obscured by any layer. Here is an example:

{{ include_code("test/examples/gerberx3/api/_70_multi_file_constructor_showcase.project.py", "docspygerberlexer", title="create_project.py", linenums="1") }}

{{ run_capture_stdout("python test/examples/gerberx3/api/_70_multi_file_constructor_showcase.project.py", "python create_project.py") }}

## Rendering raster images

Image rendering API of `CompositeView` object is similar to rendering API of
`GerberFile` object. `CompositeView` object exposes `render_with_pillow()` method which
renders all files into single image.

`CompositeView` automatically aligns all images during grouped rendering, determines how
big final image has to be to fit all images and merges them into single image. It is
still possible to retrieve individual images from result returned by rendering methods.

{{ include_code("test/examples/gerberx3/api/_71_multi_file_render_with_pillow.example.py", "docspygerberlexer", title="render_project.py", linenums="1") }}

<p align="center">
    <img src="render_project.png" alt="render_project" width="300" />
</p>

Image presented above is a result of rendering Gerber files from this project:
[github.com/AntonioMR/ATMEGA328-Motor-Board](https://github.com/AntonioMR/ATMEGA328-Motor-Board)

## Accessing individual images

After rendering a image with `CompositeView` object you can still access individual
images by using
[`get_sub_images()`](../../reference/pygerber/gerber/api/__init__.md#pygerber.gerber.api.CompositePillowImage.get_sub_images)
method available on
[`CompositePillowImage`](../../reference/pygerber/gerber/api/__init__.md#pygerber.gerber.api.CompositePillowImage)
object returned by `render_with_pillow()` method.

{{ include_code("test/examples/gerberx3/api/_72_multi_file_render_with_pillow_single_file_access.example.py", "docspygerberlexer", title="render_project.py", linenums="1") }}

<p align="center">
    <img src="single_file_from_project.png" alt="render_project" width="300" />
</p>

## Further reading

Check out full reference of
[`pygerber.gerber.api`](../../reference/pygerber/gerber/api/__init__.md).
